feat(RFC): Add Internal Trace Model. (#20170)
vectordotdev/vector: rfcs/2024-03-22-20170-trace-data-model.md

> # RFC <issue#> - 2024-03-22 - Establish an Internal Trace Model

Author: ```suggestion
# RFC 20170 - 2024-03-22 - Establish an Internal Trace Model
```

As of today there is an already existing Log and Metric event model, the purpose is to establish an
internal model for describing a trace event.

## Context

The [Ingest OpenTelemetry Traces RFC] was accepted, but there was a condition that an [internal trace model] MUST be

> estabilished. Meanwhile, there's also the [Accept Datadog Traces RFC] which was estabilished, but

Author: ```suggestion
established. Meanwhile, there's also the [Accept Datadog Traces RFC] which was established, but
```

# RFC 20170 - 2024-03-22 - Establish an Internal Trace Model

As of today there is an already existing Log and Metric event model, the purpose is to establish an
internal model for describing a trace event.

## Context

The [Ingest OpenTelemetry Traces RFC] was accepted, but there was a condition that an [internal trace model] MUST be
established. Meanwhile, there's also the [Accept Datadog Traces RFC] which was established, but
that primarily only works well with the [`datadog_traces` sink]. There was also a previous RFC which
was concerned with [validating schemas], but never came attempted to define an event schema.  This leaves this RFC
to establish that data model.

## Cross cutting concerns

> - This is part of the effort to support [sending OpenTelemetry traces], it would also support
>   ingesting OpenTelemetry. As well as to provide a path for a canonical model which traces can be
>   translated to/from ideally without loss of fidelity.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- This is part of the effort to support [sending OpenTelemetry traces] as well as ingesting them.
   This requires a canonical trace data model which can carry these traces without loss of fidelity.
```

Reviewer: Note, that this is also not a cross-cutting concern, as it is one of the _core_ issues for developing this model.

## Scope

### In scope

- Define a Vector Trace event model schema.

> - Support for Links between `TraceEvent`s.

Reviewer: I don't believe this document ever discusses any such linkage.

- Defining a mapping between the Vector trace event model to the Datadog trace event (one direction).
- Defining a mapping between the Vector trace event model and the OpenTelemetry trace event
  (bi-directional).

### Out of scope

> - Change the `TraceEvent` type internally from a re-typing of `LogEvent`.

Reviewer: I don't see why this must be out of scope, if the desired data model requires a change.

Reviewer 2: I'm also a bit confused on this one. It seems like the RFC here is proposing a strongly-typed representation, which I think makes sense, but means we'd also have an actual struct representing the trace event.

Author: Removed

- Define the settings and configuration for sinks and sources using the data model.

## Pain

- Without an internal trace model it makes it more difficult to manage adding `sinks`, `sources`,
  and `transforms` to Vector allowing for translations functions between the various components.

## Proposal

### User Experience

- As a Vector user I would like to be able to ingest and propagate traces using various protocols.
  This will allow for the greatest flexibility when managing and migrating services of developed by
  a set of different sources, including closed and open source software.

### Implementation

> For the initial Implementation, the data model will be [v1.1.0][otel-proto-110] of the OpenTelemetry Proto.

Reviewer: Some general description of what is in the data model would be useful here. Also, is this data model so generic that only a `Map` can describe it, or are more dedicated data types relevant?

Author: I think this maybe is resolved, perhaps con be continued in other specific threads.

Therefore the only necessary mapping will be how the Proto data model maps to the `TraceEvent`.

#### Mapping OpenTelemetry Tracing to Vector Data Model

This section reflects similarly to how the current Log `source` for `opentelemetry` works.

As OpenTelemetry is the primary model the this will only describe the data types. The top level
`TraceEvent` will represent a top level proto `message ResourceSpans`.

> `Value::Object`.  The remaining proto to mappings can be found:

Reviewer: The remaining mappings of what?

| Proto Type | Vector Type |
|------------|-------------|
| `message AnyValue` | `Value` of the inner |
| `message ArrayValue` | `Value::Array` with elements in `values` |
| `message KeyValueList` | `Value::Array` with elements in `values` |
| Any unspecified `message` types | `Value::Object` |
| All `enum` types | `Value::Integer` |
| `string` | `Value::Bytes`  |
| `fixed64` for datetime values | `Value::Timestamp` |
| `fixed64`,`fixed32`,`uint32` for generic values  | `Value::Integer` |
| `bytes` | `Value::Bytes` |
| `repeated` messages | `Value::Array` of `Value::Object` |

> The keys for `message` come the field names for `Value::Object`, and MUST follow a "Snake Case" format.
> As an example, instead of `traceId` and `droppedEventCount`, use `trace_id` and `dropped_event_count`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The keys for `message` come the field names for `Value::Object`, and MUST follow a "snake case" format.
As an example, instead of `traceId` and `droppedEventCount`, use `trace_id` and `dropped_event_count`.
```

#### Mapping Vector Tracing to the Datadog Data Model

The basis of Mapping between the Internal Trace format and the Datadog format can be based on the

> [Datadog agent][datadog-agent-otlp-ingest-09].

Reviewer: This warrants some expansion as well.

###### Attribute Handling

For Mapping from Vector to Datadog the scope of ResourceSpan attributes -> ScopeSpan attributes and
Span attributes are merged. The reverse it will not be expanded.

To begin `.["resource"]["attributes"][*]` are placed in the `Meta` map.

After for any `.["scope_spans"][i]["spans"][j]["attributes"][k]` Meta[k] for any non-Integer and
non-Double type values. Transcoding the values to Strings.

There are a number of Datadog specific transcodings, but it generally has to do with translating
semantic conventions to [Datadog conventions][datadog-agent-otlp-ingest-09].

###### Span Name Mapping

Follow [Datadog agent][datadog-agent-otlp-ingest-09] for OTLP -> Datadog. For Datadog -> OTLP Span
Name.

###### Span Kinds and Types

| Vector Span Kind | Datadog Span Type | Comments |
|------------------|-------------------|----------|
| Server | "web" |  |
| Client | "cache" | If the "db.system" exists in any of the Attribute scopes AND value matches
"redis" or "memcached" |
| Client | "db" | If the "db.system" exists in any of the Attribute scopes |
| Client | "http" | If the above conditions are not true. |
| * | "custom" |  |

> #####

Author: ```suggestion
```

##### From Vector -> Datadog

As `TraceEvent` is a representation of a OTLP `ResourceSpans` message. In Datadog the ingestion
format expects an Map of Array of Spans. The map key is the `trace_id`.

##### From Datadog -> Vector

> There's not a known advantage to providing this.

Author: removed

## Rationale

As of right now there is no alternatives to this, and providing this will allow for interoperability
between trace formats. Not doing this will prevent the ["must have" OpenTelemetry issue][github-top-level-otel-issue] from being
able to be completed.

## Drawbacks

- TBD

## Prior Art

- [W3C Trace Context](https://www.w3.org/TR/trace-context/) used for propagating data.
- [OpenTracing Model](https://github.com/opentracing/specification/blob/master/specification.md)
  predecessor to OpenTelemetry, and used as the basis for Jaeger's internal model.
- [Zipkin Data Model](https://zipkin.io/zipkin-api/#/default/get_spans)
- [OpenTelemetry Data Model](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-proto/blob/main/opentelemetry/proto/trace/v1/trace.proto)

## Alternatives

### Using OpenTelemetry-Inspired Model

> Rather than needing to respecify the definitions and re-create work done by the wider OpenTelemetry

Reviewer 3: Isn't the proposal this? It just does conversions of the proto types to Vector's internal Rust types but keeps the structure of Resource -> InstrumentationScope -> Spans the same?

Author: Clarified the title and description.

| Resource      | `.scope_spans[i].spans[j].name`             |                                |
| Meta          | X                                           | See "Attribute Handling"       |
| Metrics       | `.scope_spans[i].spans[j].attributes[k]`    | Metrics[k] is assigned, for \  |
|               |                                             | Integer or Double type values. |

###### Attribute Handling

For Mapping from Vector to Datadog the scope of ResourceSpan attributes -> ScopeSpan attributes and
Span attributes are merged. The reverse it will not be expanded.

To begin `.resource["attributes"][*]` are placed in the `Meta` map.

After for any `.scope_spans[i].spans"][j]["attributes"][k]` Meta[k] for any non-Integer and
non-Double type values. Transcoding the values to Strings.

There are a number of Datadog specific transcodings, but it generally has to do with translating
semantic conventions to [Datadog conventions][datadog-agent-otlp-ingest-7601].

###### Span Name Mapping

Follow [Datadog agent][datadog-agent-otlp-ingest-7601] for OTLP -> Datadog. For Datadog -> OTLP Span
Name.

> ###### Span Kinds and Types

Reviewer 4: Are we missing some cases here? Per [spank_kind.go](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector/blob/main/pdata/ptrace/span_kind.go#L14-L35).

Also, we can remove the `Comments` column.
